[WHOOSH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard, and
this is "Mystery Teachings."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Would you like to be able
to handle big life changes
with more grace in your life?
Often, big changes can be
very disruptive to our lives.
Leading to stress
and loss and anxiety.
But what if we could
learn to thrive on change?
Well, this is at the
heart of the lessons
that we now encounter in
our next steps of the hero's
journey.
We're now in the ascending
stages of the hero's
evolutionary journey.
And we're coming to a
time of real testing
for the hero, when the
alchemical process becomes
more intense.
And these next
several stages will
reveal whether we've really
truly integrated the lessons
from the previous steps
and where we still
have our work to do.
And by the time we
emerge from this process,
though, we'll be transformed
and much more in touch
with our deeper
aspects of our soul.
In this episode, we
meet the archetypes
of Death and Temperance.
Death deals with all matters of
transformation and transition.
While Temperance is about
verification and balance.
These are important
stages of development
in our search for understanding
the laws of the universe
and achieving self-mastery.
Following from The Hanged
Man's self-sacrifice,
the next archetype we meet on
the hero's journey is Death.
This key is obviously
about death of any kind,
and its image shows
death's familiar face.
According to
Kabbalisitc tradition,
what happens after you leave
the physical vehicle is actually
better than what happens here.
So when a loved one dies, our
grief is more for our own loss,
than it is for them.
For they're really, now
more alive even than we are.
And that's why Death is also
called the Key of Deliverance.
Now most people's biggest
fear in life is facing death.
And this single fear
holds more people back
from truly living than
you might realize.
Because truly living
requires taking risks.
Initiation is about
becoming what we call twice
born within this lifetime.
Where we willingly
let our old life die.
Our old personality
dies in order
for us to attain the
knowledge of our eternal self,
and then begin a new
life from that awareness.
This is why Death is also
called the Great Initiator.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The body develops by renewal.
The cells of our body die daily,
but new ones are also made,
and life continues.
And every night, our
consciousness goes to sleep.
But every morning,
it's revived, again.
So let's not make the
mistake of looking
at death in just the
conventional and literal way.
Like it's an absolute
ending or something.
In Tarot, death signifies change
and transformation of any kind.
And like the
ouroboros serpent that
bites its own tail, consuming
and renewing itself,
each ending is a new beginning.
And the cycles of
change go on and on.
Now the key of Death is
ruled by the number 13.
Is that any big surprise?
But contrary to
popular superstition,
13 is not actually
an unlucky number.
13 is just one more than 12--
the number of completion.
So it's a step beyond the
ending, into a new beginning.
13 is a powerful number in terms
of cycles of transformation.
For example, there's 13
lunar months within a year.
And when we add the 1
plus the 3, we get 4.
And this shows us
that this key is
related to The
Magician, number one,
to The Empress, number three.
And that results in The
Emperor, number four.
Now let's explore the imagery
and symbolism of the Death key.
We see a skeleton rider, clad
in a full suit of black armor.
And he rides in from the
West upon a white horse.
He carries a banner,
and this banner
has the same two colors
of black and white in it.
The scene shows a king has
died, and his wife and child
are on their knees.
The woman is struck with grief.
And the child holds
a bouquet of flowers.
There's also a
Hierophant, or a priest,
standing and praying
over all of them.
But you can see that Death
is much larger and more
powerful than them all.
When he appears, no one
is immune to the changes
that he brings.
Now recall that in Tarot,
the male figures usually
represent aspects of
our self-consciousness
or our conscious mind.
Well, the female figures
represent aspects
of the subconscious mind.
Children represent a
product of the masculine
and the feminine in co-creation.
And the Hierophant
represents that High Priest
of the mysteries, who
conducts the higher
levels of initiations
and sacred rites.
But what does the
skeleton represent here?
The skeleton actually
represents your true self.
It's the essential part of you
that is beyond your personality
and body.
Now the skeleton is a great
symbol for our true self
because it's the core structure
that the body is built upon.
The skeleton remains, even
after the worms of the Earth
have consumed the flesh.
The skeleton is the
toughest part of our body.
Flesh may decay, but
the bones remain.
So the skeleton is
our eternal self
that always remains,
even after the Earth has
claimed our limbs.
This tells us that this
ominous-looking character
of Death is actually, us.
It's our eternal self.
And in this form, our
true self is saying,
it's time for change.
Now the black colors
that we see in this image
relate to Saturn,
or Father Time,
which is also related to
the principle of elimination
and limitation.
We all have things that
we want to and need
to eliminate in our
lives, including
emotional attachments, limiting
thoughts, and various worldly
attachments.
So Death's role is to help
us to let go of those things,
and to let that which
no longer serves us die.
Now there are five
characters in this card--
the dead king on the ground,
a priest or the Hierophant,
a woman, a child,
and Death, himself.
And this alludes to
the power of the number
five and its connection here.
Also, the banner
the Death carries
has a five-petaled rose.
Now five, if you'll recall,
represents the quintessence,
the fifth element,
the spirit of life,
which is concealed
within the four elements.
It is the source
of all living form.
The white rose on the banner
appears only one other time
in the whole of Tarot, which
is in The Fool's left hand
at key zero.
Which represents that
super consciousness
of our pure spirit.
So in both these
keys, the white rose
refers to the purification
of our desired nature.
It's a symbol of illumination.
Now, many might assume
that the sun that we
see in the background
of this card
is setting because they
consider death an ending.
But in truth, the
mystery teachings
say that this is a rising sun.
It's rising on the
Eastern side of this card.
As the Key of
Sunrise, therefore, it
symbolizes rebirth.
And is a continuous
process of recreation,
day by day, and with
each breath we take.
Now the rising sun
also symbolizes that we
should look forward to the new.
Also notice in the
background of this card
that there's the river or
the stream of consciousness.
That river of life.
And we can see a boat upon it.
And the boat is sailing
towards the sun,
to indicate the flow or the
direction of this river.
Its flowing towards the sun,
which means its returning
to the source of light.
Just like we are now,
on the ascension path
back towards our source.
And as you can see, some
things about this key
are actually very positive
and happy, rather than sad.
It's truly, an optimistic key.
Now just remember,
the major character
depicted as Death in this
key is your essential self.
Now what is Death
trying to teach us here?
Well, this key involves all
matters of transformation,
change, and movement.
We actually thrive on change.
And the good things that
we wish for in our life
depends on change.
It teaches us that
perpetual change
is the root of everything.
And on this path, there
are many kinds of death.
One way or another,
when death appears,
we must be willing to
surrender to the process
of transformation.
Fighting our changes will only
make things more difficult.
So the main lesson is
to not resist change.
And the transformation
implied here involves
both a death and a rebirth.
It requires a willingness to
let go of old ways of being,
as well as to be open
to new experiences.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Now what are some other
important correspondences
of death?
Well, his secret
title or esoteric name
is the child of the
great transformers
and the lord of
the gates of death.
The element associated
here is water,
which relates to the
astrological correspondence,
which is Scorpio.
So death is ruled by the sign of
Scorpio, which is a fixed water
sign in the Zodiac.
And water gives us
the feelings that
can range from pure feelings,
to intense, to a spiritual
and nature-type of feeling.
And in matters of
love, water also
seeks soulmate-type
relationships
that are rather
intense and spiritual.
So this is the kind
of relationship
that Scorpios tend to like.
Now in astrology, Scorpio
rules the Eighth House
of the Horoscope, which
is the House of Death.
And it's co-ruled by Mars,
which is related to the Tower
and Pluto, which is related
to judgment, which we'll
be exploring down the line.
Scorpio's introspective nature
allows people to honestly look
within themselves.
To find out what needs to
be transformed or healed,
and then emerge renewed
and rejuvenated.
What's interesting about
Scorpio is that it actually
has three symbols, which
represent three different types
or stages of transformation.
There's the scorpion, which
most people think of as Scorpio.
And this represents the parts
of ourselves that might lash out
and sting during times of change
and letting go because it feels
threatened.
Sometimes a scorpion
actually stings itself, more
than anyone else.
Second symbol is the
snake, which reminds us
that in order to
transform, we have
to shed our old skin in order
to emerge into a new identity.
And the third
symbol is the eagle
and/or sometimes the phoenix.
And this reflects the overall
vision and perspective
that's needed--
that higher perspective
that's needed to become more
of who we truly are.
Some other key words
that are associated
with death and Scorpio include
transformation, change,
emergence, release, transition,
endings, new beginnings.
And the strengths
and virtues that we
can achieve in
working with this key
include transcendence,
liberation, acceptance.
Now these strengths are the more
pure and balanced expressions
of this key, but if they
get into any distortions
of too much or too
little, it leads
to weaknesses and imbalances.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So some of the
things to watch out
for in the shadow side of death
include a resistance or fear
of change.
Being unwilling to move on.
An inability to
understand others.
And allowing fear to control
you or keep you stuck.
Any kind of
stagnation, as well as
an unwillingness to experience
and express our emotional pain.
Now think of times when
you've encountered the Death
archetype in your life.
In a very literal way,
any time that you've
had to deal with the
death of a loved one,
this archetype was present.
But this could
also have shown up
through any type of
ending and new beginning,
such as a divorce or
breakup of a relationship.
Or a job loss, which then
set you on a new surge.
Or it could have been
the death of an old part
of your own personality or way
of life that no longer served.
In all these endings, we'll
experience a sense of loss
and grief, and that's natural.
And it's Death who helps us
through this grieving process.
So long as we allow
ourselves to actually feel
these deep emotions.
Now anytime you've
committed yourself
to changing some
aspect of your life,
Death was there, especially
when it comes to letting go
and moving forward.
Or you may have had times
when you helped others
during a time of change in their
life or some kind of a loss.
The more you come to
recognize Death in your life,
the more it will
also help you connect
with one of your parallel
lives where Death
is the dominant archetype.
So examples might include a
hospice and a care worker,
who support people through
their process of transition
into the afterlife.
But it's also the
midwives, the nurses,
and doctors who play key roles
in the birth process of babies.
Or perhaps, it might
be various types
of counselors who specialize
in assisting people
with handling the loss of
loved ones or through divorce
or any kind of physical death.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
And these are often very loving
and compassionate people,
with this capacity to experience
life and relationships very
deeply.
They've learned that
both death and birth are
very sacred moments,
when the veils
between the physical and
the spiritual are very thin.
So these people
tend to recognize
the existence of spirit.
They're very empathic.
And they feel, how special
it is to hold space
for such transitions.
And by working with Death
and invoking its energies
into your life, you, too,
can awaken your capacity
to understand the mysteries
of birth, life, and death.
And to more
gracefully, transform.
As we move beyond
the lessons of Death,
our next step on
the hero's journey
brings us to the Temperance key.
Now this is where we learn
to thrive on the changes that
have been brought on by Death.
And it brings us a
renewed sense of purpose.
Here, we meet one of the
major alchemists of the deck.
Temperance means literally,
tempering or modifying,
which relates to adaptation.
Now to adapt is to
adjust, to evolve
in a way that really
leads towards a greater
equilibrium and balance.
And temperance is a process
of creative transformation.
Now in times when metalworking
was one of the ancient arts
and sciences of alchemy,
this process of tempering
involved heating the
metal up in the fire
until it became
pliable and soft.
Then taking it out,
hammering it into shape,
and then dowsing it in the
water to re-solidify it.
And then repeating this
cycle as many times as
is needed, until the metal
became strong and unbreakable.
Now in metalworking,
we're often trying
to get to different
types of metal
to blend together
into an amalgam.
And this is the
same kind of thing
that temperance will
do in our lives.
It's trying to merge our
feminine and our masculine
or our subconscious
and our conscious sides
into one balanced
and integrated whole.
And in the alchemical
process, temperance
brings us to the stage
known as conjunction.
It's a rejoining of
the separate essences
that have now been purified.
And we're bringing them back
now into a harmonious mixture.
This card teaches us that when
we moderate our indulgences,
whether they're physical,
emotional, or spiritual,
we'll find the equilibrium
and the balance at some point.
So this is all about moderation
and finding that balance.
Now Temperance is
ruled by the number
14, which represents challenge.
It's a combination
of the number one
and the number
four, which relate
to the ideas of The Magician
and The Emperor, both of which
are masculine,
action-oriented keys that work
with conscious use of will.
Now 14 is the outer expression
or practical application
of the essence of five.
So Temperance is an outer
expression of the Hierophant.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Let's now explore some of the
imagery and symbolism embedded
within this card.
We see an angelic
presence of being,
in a white robe
with red wings, who
stands with one foot
in a pool of water
and the other foot
on solid rock.
He's carefully mixing
liquid essences
between two golden challis.
And their union creates
the elixir of life.
There is a path that leads
from this pool of water
off to a distant mountain, where
we see a shining crown that
hovers above the mountains.
Now this being is
Archangel Michael,
or we actually pronounce
his name Michael.
His name literally means
the likeness of God
or that which is like God.
Meaning that he shows us the
light of our own divinity
within.
He is like a holy
guardian angel,
who shows us a vision of our
true self that we aspire to be.
Now the reason that we know
that this is Archangel Michael
is because of the upright
triangle on his chest
which represents fire,
the disk on his forehead
which is a symbol of the
sun, and the red wings which
are also an element of fire.
Now of the four
cardinal angels, Michael
relates to fire and the
direction of the South, as well
as that noonday summer sun.
So Michael is the fire
that enlivens, purifies,
and transforms our soul.
He dispels ignorance,
distortion, and immaturity.
Now if we look back
to this pool of water
that he has one of his feet
in, this water, remember,
comes from the stream
of consciousness
that originated in The
High Priestess card.
And it's a symbol of
that cosmic mind stuff.
So Michael's right
foot is standing
in these waters of life,
while his left foot stands
on a rock, which is a symbol
of stability and concrete
manifestation.
The Earth plane
is the outer world
of expression and
experience, while the waters
are the inner planes
of consciousness.
So what this is showing us
is that to achieve balance,
we should have one foot in
heaven and the other on Earth.
Also, it suggests that
a spiritual foundation
or practice really supports
our daily physical life.
And likewise, having a
strong physical foundation
supports our spiritual growth.
So we need both.
Now notice also, how the path
rises over the rolling hills.
This hints at the
principle of vibration.
And this path leads
to the mountains
of understanding and wisdom.
And it suggests that the
path's end is within reach.
We can see it right now.
And that shining
crown is a symbol
of Katara at the top
of the Tree of Life.
And that shows us the light
at the end of the tunnel.
So what's this key of
Temperance trying to show us?
Well, Temperance
wants us to align
with the energies of beauty,
harmony, and moderation.
It holds the key
to how to safely
use higher levels of
consciousness, as well.
Now rising up to a higher level
of consciousness too quickly
can bring a rapid onset
of psychic awareness,
which actually
destabilizes us if we
don't know what to do with
it or how to understand what
it is we're seeing and sensing.
So temperance is showing us not
to forsake our physical life
foundation in pursuit
of spiritual awareness.
We must keep one foot
firmly grounded in Earth.
Balancing the spiritual
and physical sides of life
is essential for this
attainment process.
And only through this kind
of balance equilibrium
can we discover our
true purpose in life
and really fulfill
our potential.
Now let's go through some other
correspondences of Temperance.
It's secret name
or esoteric title
is the daughter
of the reconcilers
and the bringer forth of life.
The element here
is immutable fire,
which corresponds with
the astrological sign
of Sagittarius.
It's all this
introspection and healing
that we had from
the time of Scorpio
can leave us feeling a bit
subdued and melancholy.
And that's where
Sagittarius comes in.
It wants to play.
Now Sagittarians are full
of optimism, joviality,
and they are the
life of the party.
So Sagittarius also has a
philosophical side, though.
It seeks answers to deep,
meaningful, spiritual,
religious, or esoteric
questions that the philosophers
throughout the ages have posed.
And because of this,
Sagittarius has
become wise and understanding.
And they're usually able
to give very good advice.
Sagittarius rules
the Ninth House
of journeys and philosophy,
which is about experience
through expansion.
And it's also ruled
by the planet Jupiter.
Now Sagittarians are
usually very charismatic,
and they are artisans
of creating the image
that they want the world
to see, whether that's
through words or appearances.
And as we work with
Temperance, some
of the strengths and virtues
that it awakens in us
can be productivity, endurance.
And always remember, moderation.
Now these strengths are the
pure and balanced expression
of Temperance.
But if we get into
distortions where it's either
too much or not enough, then
we fall into the weaknesses
and the shadow side.
So some of those
shadows that we need
to watch out for
here with Temperance
include self-doubt,
falling into temptation,
being irresponsible,
being overly indulgent
and getting into
addictions, exaggeration,
and narrow-sightedness.
So how does Temperance
show up in your life?
Have you ever been
through a time
where you felt like you were
being put through the wringer?
Or burned by the fire, doused
in the water, hammered by life?
Well, these were likely
tempering life lessons for you
that were meant
to help you mature
and become more resilient.
While not easy, these
lessons teach us patience.
They teach us steadfastness
and determination.
They're necessary developmental
phases for our inner growth.
Initiations were once a part
of every shamanic society.
And such challenges
that tempered us
were understood as
rites of passage.
But today, unfortunately, this
understanding is less common.
And too many people tend to see
themselves as victims of life,
rather than rising
to the challenges
that they're presented with
and using them as opportunities
to become stronger.
So when you need some help
with meeting challenges,
call on Temperance
to support you.
Now the more you come
to recognize Temperance
in your life here
and now, the more
it will also connect you with
one of your parallel lives,
where Temperance is
the dominant archetype.
What might our parallel life
look like under the archetype
of Temperance?
Well people under the
influence of Temperance
have a natural ability to work
with the principles of alchemy
in life.
They're constantly
learning how two or more
is always better
than one, so long
as they can establish the right
synergy amongst the parts.
Whether these parts are people,
ingredients for art, ideas,
or scientific disciplines.
Now as a quintessential
example, think of someone
like Leonardo da Vinci.
As one of the greatest
minds of all times,
he's an excellent
example of both
the creative and alchemical
expressions of Temperance.
Da Vinci was the
original Renaissance man,
blending art and science.
He was a painter, a sculptor,
an engineer, an inventor,
and a scientist.
And Temperance often
expresses itself
through artists who are
practitioners of what
we might call creative alchemy.
Or they might also be a maverick
or a well-connected networker,
who's mastered the art
of relationship alchemy.
And they love to entertain
guests, to tell stories,
and to sell the ideas
they believe in.
They also love
making new friends
and connecting
people together where
they see potential synergy.
Now by working with Temperance
and invoking its energies
into your life, you, too,
can awaken your ability
to thrive on change.
Join me, again, as
we explore further
into the 22 archetypes
of Tarot, and how
they can help us to make our
big shift in consciousness.
I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard.
Thank you for exploring
the mysteries of Tarot
and our
multi-dimensionality with me
in this episode of
"Mystery Teachings."